borsch and senator kerry their final
debate the setting the american west
tempe arizona tonight the domestic
issues that divide america the economy
medicare which changing face of the
american family
the candidates last chance to go
head-to-head america is watching nbc
news decision 2004 the presidential
debates from arizona state university in
tempe arizona brokaw
good evening from arizona state
university in tempe eve where tonight
for 90 minutes president george w bush
and john kerry debate the domestic
issues the economy health care taxes
stem-cell research
abortion all that against the continuing
backdrop of the war in iraq and against
terrorism here at home and also abroad
it is their final scheduled face-to-face
meeting although they both will be
spending so much time in the same
handful of battleground states in the
next 20 days they could save a lot of
fuel by carpooling not very likely but
it does have a certain down-home appeal
in this debate the rules from the first
one apply 90 minutes here on the
mountain time zone so they will have
extra time for their post debate rallies
now here's the moderator for tonight's
debate bob schieffer of cbs news and
face the nation good evening from
arizona state university in tempe
arizona i'm bob schieffer of cbs news i
want to welcome you to the third and
last of the 2004 debates between
president george bush and senator john
kerry as jim lehrer told you before the
first one these debates are sponsored by
the commission on presidential debates
tonight the topic will be domestic
affairs but the format will be the same
as that first debate i'll moderate our
discussion under detail rules read to by
the candidates but the questions and the
areas to be covered were chosen by me i
have not told the candidates or anyone
else what they are to refresh your
memory on the rules i will ask a
question the candidate has allowed two
minutes to answer his opponent then has
a minute and a half to offer a rebuttal
at my discretion i can extend the
discussion by offering each candidate an
additional 30 seconds
a green light will come on to signal the
candidate has 30 seconds left a yellow
light signals 15 seconds left a red
light means 5 seconds left there is also
a buzzer if it is needed the candidates
may not question each other directly
there are no opening statements there
were but there will be
minute closing statements there is an
audience here tonight but they have
agreed to remain silent except for right
now when they join me in welcoming
president george bush and senator john
gentlemen welcome to you both by coin
toss the first question goes to senator
kerry senator i want to set the stage
for this discussion by asking the
question that i think hangs over all of
our politics today and is probably on
the minds of many people watching this
debate tonight and that is well our
children and grandchildren ever live in
a world as safe and secure as the world
in which we grew up well first of all
thank you for moderating tonight thank
you arizona state for welcoming us and
thank you to the presidential commission
for undertaking this enormous task we're
proud to be here mr president
i'm glad to be here with you again to
share similarities and differences with
the american people will we ever be safe
and secure again yes we absolutely must
be that's the goal now how do we achieve
it is the most critical component of it
i believe that this president
regrettably rushed us into a war made
decisions about foreign policy pushed
alliances away and as a result america
is now bearing this extraordinary burden
where we are not as safe as we ought to
be the measurement is not are we safer
the measurement is are we as safe as we
ought to be and there are a host of
options that this president had
available to him like making sure that
our all our ports in america containers
are inspected only ninety-five percent
of them
ninety-five percent come in today
uninspected that's not good enough
people who fly on airplanes today the
cargo hold is not x-rayed
but the baggage is that's not good
enough fire houses don't have enough
fire fighters in them police officers
are being cut from the streets of
america because the president decided to
cut the cops program so we can do a
better job of homeland security i can do
a better job of waging the smarter more
effective war on terror and guarantee
that we go after the terrorists i will
hunt them down and we'll kill them we'll
capture them we'll do whatever necessary
to be safe but i pledge this to you
america i will do it in the way that
franklin roosevelt and ronald reagan and
john kennedy and others did where we
build the strongest alliances where the
world joins together where we have the
best intelligence and where we are able
ultimately to be more safe and secure
mr president you have 90s thank you
very much i want to thank arizona state
as well yes we can be safe and secure if
we stay on the offense against the
terrorists and if we spread freedom and
liberty around the world i have got a
comprehensive strategy to not only chase
down al qaeda wherever it exists we're
making progress there three-quarters of
al qaeda leaders have been brought to
but to make sure that countries who
harbor terrorists are held to account as
a result of securing ourselves and
ridding the taliban out of afghanistan
the afghan people had elections this
weekend and the first voter was a 19
year old woman think about that freedom
is on the march we held to account a
terrorist regime and saddam was saying
in other words in order to make sure
we're secure there must be a
comprehensive plan my opponent just this
weekend talked about how terrorism can
be reduced to a nuisance comparing it to
prostitution illegal gambling i think
that attitude and that point of view is
dangerous i don't think you can secure
america for the long run if you don't
have a comprehensive view as to how to
feed these people at home we'll do
everything we can to protect the
homeland i signed the homeland security
bill to better align our assets and
resources my opponent voted against it
we're doing everything we can to protect
our borders and ports but absolutely we
can be secure in the long run it just
takes good strong leadership anything to
carry yes when the president had an
opportunity to capture or kill osama bin
laden he took his focus off of him
outsource the job to afghan warlords and
osama bin laden escaped six months after
he said osama bin laden must be caught
dead or alive this president was asked
where's osama bin laden he said i don't
know i don't really think about him very
much i'm not that concerned we need a
president who stays deadly focused on
the real war on
as president oh gosh i don't think ever
said i'm not worried about osama bin
laden it's kind of one of those
exaggerations of course we're worried
about osama bin laden we're on the hunt
after osama bin laden we're using every
asset at our disposal to get osama bin
laden my opponent said this war is a
matter of intelligence and in law
enforcement no this is a war as a matter
of using every asset are at our disposal
to keep the american people protected
new question mr president to you we're
talking about protecting ourselves from
the unexpected but the flu season is
suddenly upon us flu kills thousands of
people every year suddenly we find
ourselves with a severe shortage of flu
vaccine how did that happen
bob we were reliant upon a company out
of england to provide about half of the
flu vaccines for the united states
citizen and it turned out that the
vaccine they were producing was
contaminated and so we took the right
action and didn't allow contaminated
medicine into our country we're working
with canada hopefully that they'll
produce a help us realize the vaccine
necessary to make sure our citizens have
got flu vaccinations during this
upcoming season my call to our fellow
americans is if you're healthy if you're
younger don't get a flu shot this year
and help us prioritize those who need to
get the flu shot the elderly and the
young the cdc responsible for health in
the united states is setting those
priorities and is allocating the flu
vaccine accordingly i haven't gotten a
flu shot and i don't intend to because i
want to make sure that those who are
most vulnerable i get treated we have a
problem with litigation in the united
states of america vaccine manufacturers
are worried about getting sued and so
therefore they have backed off from
providing this
a vaccine one of the reasons i'm such a
strong believer in legal reform is so
that people aren't afraid of producing a
product that is necessary for the health
of our citizens and then end up getting
sued in a court of law
but the best thing we can do now bob
given the circumstances with the company
in england is for those of us who are
younger and healthy i don't get a flu
shot so to carry this really underscores
the problem with the american healthcare
system it's not working for the american
family and it's gotten worse under
president bush over the course of the
last years five million americans have
lost their health insurance in this
country you got about a million right
here in arizona just shy 950,000 who had
no health insurance at all 82,000
arizonians lost their health insurance
under president bush's watch 223
thousand kids in arizona have no health
insurance at all
all across our country go to ohio one
point four million ohioans have no
health insurance 114 thousand of them
lost it under president bush wisconsin
82,000 wisconsinites lost it under
president bush this president has turned
his back on the wellness of america and
there is no system in fact it's starting
to fall apart
not because of lawsuits though they are
a problem and john edwards and i are
committed to fixing them but because of
the larger issue that we don't cover
americans children across our country
don't have health care we're the richest
country on the face of the planet the
only industrialized nation in the world
not to do it i have a plan to cover all
americans we're going to make it
affordable accessible we're going to let
everybody buy into the same health care
plan senators and congressmen give
themselves mr president would you like
to add something i would thank you i
want to remind people listening tonight
that a plan is not a litany of
complaints and a plan is not to lay out
programs that you can't pay for
he just said he wants everybody to be
able to buy into the same plan that
senators and congressmen get that cost
the government seven thousand seven
hundred dollars per family if every
family in america signed up but thank
the senator suggests it would cost us
five trillion dollars over ten years
it's an empty promise it's called bait
and switch time's up
thank you actually it's not an empty
promise that's really interesting
because the president used that very
plan as a reason for for seniors to
accept his prescription drug plan he
said if it's good enough for for the
congressmen and senators to have choice
seniors ought to have choice what we do
is we have choice i choose blue cross
blue shield other senators other
congressmen choose other programs but
the fact is we're going to help
americans be able to buy into it those
that can afford it are gonna buy in
themselves we're not giving this away
for nothing
all right under carry a new question
let's talk about economic security you
pledged during the last debate that you
would not raise taxes on those making
less than two hundred thousand dollars a
year but the price of everything is
going up and we all know it health care
cost as you all are talking about
skyrocketing the cost of the war my
question is how can you or any president
whoever is elected next time keep that
pledge without running this country
deeper into debt and passing on more of
the bills that we're running up to our
children i'll tell you exactly how i can
do it by reinstating what president bush
took away which is called pay-as-you-go
during the 1990s we had pay-as-you-go
rules if you're going to pass something
into congress yet to show where are you
were going to pay for it now president
bush has taken he's the only president
in history to do this he's also the only
president since in in 72 years to lose
jobs 1.6 million jobs lost he's the only
president to have incomes of families go
down for the last three years the only
president c exports go down the only
president to see the lowest level of
business investment in our country as it
is today now i'm gonna reverse that i'm
gonna change that we're going to restore
fiscal discipline we had in the 1990s
every plan that i have laid out my
health care plan my plan for education
my plan for kids to be able to get
better college loans i've shown exactly
how i'm going to pay for those and we
start we don't do it exclusively but we
start by rolling back george bush's
unaffordable tax cut for the wealthiest
people people earning more than two
hundred thousand dollars a year and we
pass hopefully the mccain carey
commission which identified some sixty
billion dollars that we can get we we
shut the loophole which has american
workers actually subsidizing the loss of
their own job they just passed an
expansion of that loophole in the last
few days forty three billion dollars of
giveaways including favors to the oil
and gas industry and to people importing
ceiling fans from china i'm gonna stand
up and fight for the american worker and
i'm gonna do it in a way that's fiscally
sound i show how i pay for the health
care how we pay for the education i have
a manufacturing jobs credit we pay for
it by shutting that loophole overseas we
raise the student loans i pay for it by
changing the relationship with the banks
this president has never once vetoed one
bill first president in a hundred years
not to do that mr president well it was
rhetoric doesn't match his record he'd
been a senator for twenty years
he voted to increase taxes 98 times when
they tried to reduce taxes he voted
against that 127 times he talks about
being a fiscal conservative or fiscally
sound but he voted over
he voted 277 times to waive the budget
caps which it of cost the tenth would
have cost the taxpayers four point two
trillion dollars he talks about pay-go
i tell you what pago means when you're a
senator from massachusetts when you're a
colleague of ted kennedy pago means you
pay and he goes ahead and spends he's
proposed 2.2 trillion dollars of new
spending and yet the so-called tax on
the rich which is also a tax on many
small business owners in america
raises 600 million by our account at
billion eight hundred billion by his
account there is a tax gap and guess who
usually ends up filling the tax gap the
middle class i proposed a detailed
budget bob i send up my budget man to
the congress and he says here's how
we're going to reduce the deficit in
half by five years
it requires pro-growth policies that
grow our economy and fiscal sanity in
the halls of congress let's go to a new
question mr president two minutes and
let's continue on jobs you know there
are all kind of statistics out there but
i want to bring it down to an individual
mr president what do you say to someone
in this country who has lost his job to
someone overseas who's being paid a
fraction of what that job paid here in
the united states i say bob i've got
policies to continue to grow our economy
and create the jobs of the 21st century
and here's some help for you to go get
an education here's some help for you to
go to a community college we've expanded
trade adjustment assistance we want to
help pay for you to gain the skills
necessary to fill the jobs of the 21st
century you know there's a lot of talk
about how to keep the economy growing we
talk about fiscal matters but perhaps
the best way to keep jobs here in
america and to keep this economy growing
to make sure our education system works
i went to washington to solve problems
and i saw a problem in the public
education system and in america they
were just shuffling too many kids
through the system year after year great
after grade without learning the basics
and so we said let's raise the standards
we're spending more money but let's
raise the standards and measure early
and solve problems now before it's too
late no education is how to help the
person who's lost a job education is how
to make sure this we've got a workforce
that's productive and competitive you've
got four more years i've got more to do
to continue to raise standards to
continue to reward teachers in school
districts that are working to emphasize
math and science in the
classrooms to continue to expand pell
grants to make sure that people have an
opportunity to start their career with a
college diploma and so the person you
talk to i say here's some help here's
some trade adjustment assistance money
for you to go to a community college in
your neighbor that a community college
which is providing the skills necessary
to fill the jobs of the 21st century and
that's that what we'd say that person
senator kerry i want you to notice how
the president switched away from jobs
and started talking about education
principally let me come back in one
moment to that but i want to speak for a
second if i can to what the president
said about fiscal responsibility being
lectured by the president on fiscal
responsibility is a little bit like tony
soprano talking to me about law and
order in this country this president has
taken a five point six trillion dollar
surplus and turned it into deficits as
far as the eye can see health care costs
for the average american have gone up
tuitions have gone up 35 gasoline
prices up 30 medicare premiums went up
17 a few days ago prescription drugs
are up 12 a year but guess what america
the wages of americans have gone down
the jobs that are being created in
arizona right now paying about thirteen
thousand seven hundred dollars less than
the jobs that we're losing and the
president just walks on by this problem
the fact is that he's cut job training
money a billion dollars was cut they
only added a little bit back this year
because it's an election year
they've cut the pell grants and the
perkins loans to help kids be able to go
to college they've cut the training
money they've they've wound up not even
extending unemployment benefits and not
even extending health care to those
people are unemployed i'm gonna do those
things because that's what's right in
america help workers to transition in
every respect new question you send to
carry two minutes and it's still on jobs
you know many experts say that a
president really doesn't have much
control over jobs for example if someone
invents a machine that does the work of
five people that's progress
it's not the president's fault so i ask
you is it fair to blame the
administration entirely for this loss of
job i don't blame them entirely for it i
blame the president for the things the
president could do that has an impact on
it outsourcing is going to happen i've
acknowledged that in union halls across
the country i've had shop stewards stand
up and say will you promise me you're
gonna stop all this outsourcing and i've
looked them in the eye and i've said no
i can't do that what i could promise you
is that i will make the playing field as
fair as possible that i will for
instance make certain that with respect
to the tax system that you as a worker
in america are not subsidizing the loss
of your job today
if you're an american business you
actually get a benefit for going
overseas you get to defer your taxes so
if you're looking at a competitive world
you say to yourself hey i do better
overseas than i do here in america
that's not smart
i don't want american workers
subsidizing the loss of their own job
and when i'm president we're gonna shut
that loophole in a nanosecond and we're
gonna use that money to lower corporate
tax rates in america for all
corporations 5 and we're gonna have a
manufacturing jobs credit and a job
hiring credit so we actually help people
be able to hire here the second thing
that we can do is provide a fair trade
playing field this president didn't
stand up for boeing when airbus was
violating international rules with
subsidies he discovered boeing during
the course of this campaign after i've
been talking about it for months the
fact is that the president had an
opportunity to stand up and and and and
and take on china for currency
manipulation there are companies that
wanted to petition the administration
they were told don't even bother we're
not gonna listen to it the fact is that
they're been markets shut to us that we
haven't stood up and fought for i'm
gonna fight for a fair trade playing
field for the american worker and i will
fight for the american worker just as
hard as i fight for my own job that's
what the american worker wants and if we
do that we can have an impact plus we
need fiscal discipline restore fiscal
discipline we'll do a lot better mr
president who let me start with
the pell grants in his last litany of
misstatements he said we cut pell grants
we've increased pell grants by a million
students that's a fact
you know he talks to the workers let me
talk to the workers you got more money
in your pocket as a result of the tax
relief we pass and he opposed if you
have a child you got a $1,000 child
credit that's money in your pocket
if you're married we reduced the
marriage penalty the co-taught
encouraged marriage not discourage
marriage we created a 10 bracket to
help lower-income americans a family of
four making $40,000 received about
$1,700 in tax relief it's your money the
way my opponent talks he said we're
gonna spend the government's money no
we're spending your money and when you
have more money in your pocket you're
able to better afford things you want i
believe the role of government is to
stand side-by-side with our citizens to
help them realize their dreams not tell
citizens how to live their lives my
opponent talks about fiscal sanity he
has record in the united states senate
does not match his rhetoric he voted to
increase taxes 98 times and to bust the
budget 277 times sorry kerry
bob anybody can play with these votes
everybody knows that i have supported or
voted for tax cuts over 600 times i
broke with my party in order to balance
the budget and ronald reagan signed into
law the tax cut that we voted for i
voted for arra tax cuts i voted for
small business tax cuts but you know why
the pell grants have gone up in their
numbers because more people qualify for
them because they don't have money but
they're not getting the $5,100 the
president promised them they're getting
less money there are more people who
qualify that's not what we want
senator no one's playing when your votes
you vote increased taxes 98 times when
they voted to when they proposed
reducing taxes vote against 126 times
you voted to violate the budget caps 277
you uh you know there's a mainstream in
american politics and you sit right on
the far left bank as a matter of fact
your record is such that ted kennedy
your colleague is the conservative
senator from massachusetts mr president
let's get back to economic issues but
let's shift to some other questions here
both of you are opposed to gay marriage
but to understand how you have come to
that conclusion i want to ask you a more
basic question do you believe
homosexuality is a choice you know bob i
don't know i just don't know i do know
that we have a choice to make in america
and that is to treat people with
tolerance and respect and dignity it's
important that we do that i also know in
a free society people consenting adults
can live the way they want to live and
that's to be honored but as we respect
someone's rights and as we know
professed tolerance we shouldn't change
or have to change our basic views on the
sanctity of marriage i believe in the
sanctity of marriage i think it's very
important that we protect marriage as an
institution between a man and a woman i
proposed a constitutional amendment the
reason i did so was because i was
worried that activist judges are
actually defining the definition of
marriage and the surest way to protect
marriage between a man and woman is to
amend the constitution it has also the
benefit of allowing citizens to
participate in the process after all
when you amend the constitution state
legislatures must participate in the
ratification of the constitution i'm
deeply concerned that judges are making
those decisions and not the citizenry of
the united states you know congress
passed a law called doma the defense of
marriage act my opponent was against it
it basically protected states from the
action action of one state to another it
also defined marriage as between a man
and a woman but i'm concerned that that
will get overturned and if it gets
overturned then we'll end up with
marriage being defined by courts and i
don't think that's in our nation's
senator kerry we're all god's children
bob and i think if you were to talk to
dick cheney's daughter who is a lesbian
she would tell you that she's being who
she was being who she was born as i
think if you talk to anybody it's not
choice i've met people who struggled
with this for years people who were in a
marriage because they were living a sort
of convention and they struggled with it
and i've met wives who are supportive of
their husbands or vice versa when they
finally sort of broke out and and
allowed themselves to live who they were
who they felt god had made them i think
we have to respect that the president i
shared the belief that marriage is
between a man and a woman i believe that
i believe marriage is between a man and
a woman but i also believe that because
we are the united states of america
we're a country with a great
unbelievable constitution with rights
that we afford people that you can't
discriminate the workplace you can't
discriminate in the rights that you
afford people you can't disallow someone
the right to visit their partner in a
hospital you have to allow people to
transfer a property which is why i'm for
partnership rights it's over that now
with respect to doma and the marriage
laws the states have always been able to
manage those laws and they're proving
today every state that they can manage
them adequately santa carry a new
question for you the new york times
report said some catholic archbishop's
are telling their church members that it
would be a sin to vote for a candidate
like you because you support a woman's
right to choose an abortion and
unlimited stem-cell research what is
your reaction to that i respect their
views completely respect their views i
am a catholic and i grew up learning how
to respect those views but i disagree
with them as do many i believe
that i can't legislate or transfer to
another american citizen my article of
faith what is an article of faith for me
it's not something that i can legislate
on somebody who doesn't share that
article of faith i believe that choice
is a woman's choice it between a woman
god and her doctor and that's why i
support that now i will not allow
somebody to come in and change roe v
wade the president has never said
whether or not he would do that but we
know from the people he's trying to
point the court he wants to i will not i
will defend the right of roe v wade now
with respect to religion you know as i
said i grew up a catholic i was an altar
boy i know that throughout my life this
has made a difference to me and as
president kennedy said when he ran for
president he said i'm not running to be
a catholic president i'm running to be a
president who happens to be catholic now
my faith affects everything that i do in
truth there's a great passage of the
bible that says what does it mean my
brother to say you have faith if there
are no deeds faith without works is dead
and i think that everything you do in
public life has to be guided by your
faith affected by your faith but without
transferring it in any official way to
other people
frats why i fight against poverty that's
why i fight to clean up the environment
protect this earth that's why i fight
for equality and justice all of those
things come out of that fundamental
teaching and belief of faith but i know
this that president kennedy and his
inaugural address told all of us that
here on earth god's work must truly be
our own and that's what we have to say i
think that's the test of public service
as president i think it's important to
promote a culture of life i think a
hospitable society as a society that
where every bean counts and every person
i believe the ideal world is one in
which every child is protecting law and
welcome to life
i understand there's great differences
on this issue of abortion
but i believe reasonable people can come
together and put good law in place that
will help reduce the number of abortions
take for example the ban on
partial-birth abortion it's a brutal
practice people from from both political
parties came together in the halls of
congress and voted overwhelmingly to ban
that practice made a lot of sense
my opponent out in that he's out of the
mainstream voted against that law what
i'm saying is is that as we promote life
and promote a culture of life surely
there are ways we can work together to
reduce the number of abortions continue
to promote adoption laws that's a great
alternative to abortion continue to fund
and promote maternity group homes i will
continue to brought hap's in his
programs the last debate my opponent
said his wife was involved with those
programs that's great and i appreciate
that very much all of us ought to be
involved with programs that provide a
viable alternative to abortion mr
president let's have a new question it
goes to you and let's get back to
economic issues health insurance costs
have risen over thirty six percent over
the last four years according to the
washington post we're paying more we're
getting less i would last i'd like to
ask you who bears responsibility for
this is it the government is it the
insurance companies is it the lawyers is
and the doctors is it the administration
gosh you're sure hope is not the
administration know there is a there's a
systemic problem health care costs are
on the rise because the consumers are
not involved in the decision making
process most health care costs are
covered by third parties and therefore
the actual user of health care is not
the purchaser of health care and there's
no market forces involved with health
care it's one of the reasons i'm a
strong believer and what they call
health savings accounts these are
accounts that allow somebody to buy a
low premium high deductible catastrophic
plan and couple it with tax-free savings
businesses can contribute employees can
contribute on the contractual
basis but this is a way to make sure
people are actually involved with the
decision making process on healthcare
secondly i do believe the lawsuit i
don't believe i know that the lawsuits
are causing healthcare costs to rise in
america that's why i'm such a strong
believer in medical liability reform and
last debate my opponents said well they
only those lawsuits only caused costs to
go up by one percent well he didn't he
didn't include the defensive practice of
medicine they cost the federal
government some twenty eight billion
dollars a year in costs our society
between sixty and a hundred billion
dollars a year thirdly one of the
reasons why there's still high costs and
in medicine is because this is the they
don't use an information technology it's
like if you looked at the it's the
equivalent of the of the buggy and horse
days compared to other industries here
in america and so we've got to introduce
high technology into healthcare we're
beginning to do it we're changing the
language we want there to be electronic
medical records to cut down on era as
well as reduced cost people tell me that
when the healthcare field is fully
integrated with information technology
it'll bring some 20 of the costs out of
the system and finally moving generic
drugs to the market quicker so there's a
for ways to help control the cost in
health care gender carry the reason
healthcare costs are getting higher one
of the principal reasons is that this
administration has stood in the way of
common-sense efforts that would have
reduced the cost let me give you a prime
example in the senate we passed the
right of americans to import drugs from
canada but the president his friends
took it out in the house and now you
don't have that right the president
blocked you from the right to have less
expensive drugs from canada we also
wanted medicare to be able to negotiate
both purchasing the va does that the va
provides lower cost drugs to our
veterans we could have done that
medicare medicare is paid for by the
american taxpayer medicare belongs to
you medicare is for seniors who are many
of them on fixed income to lift them out
of poverty but rather than help you the
taxpayer have a lower cost
other than help seniors have less
expensive drugs the president made it
illegal illegal for medicare to actually
go out and bargain for lower prices
result 139 billion dollar windfall
profit to the drug companies coming out
of your pockets that's a large part of
your 17 increase in medicare premiums
when i'm president i'm sending that back
to congress and we're gonna get a real
prescription drug benefit now we also
have people sicker because they don't
have health insurance
so whether it's diabetes or cancer they
come to hospitals later and it costs
america more we got to have health care
for all americans i think it's important
since he talked about the medicare plan
i've has he been in the united states
senate for 20 years he has no record on
reforming of health care no record at
all he introduced some 300 bills and
he's passed five no record of leadership
i came to washington to solve problems i
was deeply concerned about seniors
having to choose between prescription
drugs and food and so i led and in 2006
our seniors will get a prescription drug
coverage in medicare sandir carry 30
seconds once again the president's
misleading america i've actually passed
56 individual bills that i've personally
written and in addition to that they're
not always under my name there is
amendments and certain bills but more
importantly with respect to the question
of no record i helped write i did write
now as one of the original authors of
the early childhood healthcare and the
expansion of health care that we did in
the middle of the 1990s and i'm very
proud of that
so president's wrong let me direct the
next question to you son to carry and
again let's stay on on health care you
have as you have proposed and as the
president has commented on tonight
proposed a massive plan to extend health
care coverage to children you're also
talking about the government picking up
a big part of the catastrophic bills
that people get at the hospital and you
have said that you can pay for this by
rolling back the president's tax cut on
the upper 2 you heard the president say
earlier tonight that is going to cost a
whole lot more money to
that i just asked you where are you
going to get the money well to leading
national news networks have both said
the president's characterization of my
health care plan is incorrect one called
it fiction the other called it untrue
the fact is that my health care plan
america is very simple it gives you the
choice i don't force you to do anything
it's not a government plan the
government doesn't require you to do
anything you choose your doctor you
choose your plan if you don't want to
take the offer of the plan that i want
to put forward you don't have to you can
keep what you have today keep a high
deductible keep high premiums keep a
high copay keep low benefits but i got a
better plan
and i don't think a lot of people are
going to want to keep what they have
today here's what i do we take over
medicaid children from the state so that
every child in america is covered and in
exchange if the state's want oh they're
not forced to they can choose to they
cover individuals up to three hundred
percent of poverty it's their choice i
think they'll choose it because it's a
net plus of five billion dollars to them
we allow you if you choose to you don't
have to but we give you broader
competition to allow you to buy into the
same health care plan that senators and
congressmen give themselves if it's good
enough for us it's good enough for every
american i believe that your health care
is just as important as any politician
in washington dc if you'll want to buy
into it you can we give you a broader
competition that helps lower prices in
addition to that we're gonna allow
people 55 to 64 to buy into medicare
early and most importantly we give small
business a 50 percent tax credit so that
after we lower the cost of health care
they also get whether they're
self-employed or a small business a
lower cost to be able to cover their
employees now what happens is when you
begin to get people covered like that
for instance in diabetes if you diagnose
diabetes early you could save 50 billion
dollars in the health care system of
america by avoiding surgery and dialysis
it works and i'm gonna offer it to
america mr president can all due
respect i'm not so sure
it's incredible to quote leading news
organizations about nevermind anyway let
me quote the lewin report the lewin
report is a group of folks who are not
politically affiliated they analyzed the
senators plan it cost 1.2 trillion
dollars the loon report agra lee noted
that there gonna be 20 million people
over 20 million people added the
government controlled health care be the
largest increase in government health
care ever if you raise the medicaid to
three hundred percent it provides an
incentive for small businesses not to
provide private insurance to their
employees why should they and ensure
somebody when the government's going to
insure for them it's estimated that 8
million people will go from private
insurance to government insurance we
have a fundamental difference of opinion
i think government-run health will lead
to poor quality health will lead to
rationing will lead to less choice once
a health care program ends up in a line
item in the federal government budget it
leads to more controls and just look at
other countries that have tried to have
federally controlled health care they
have poor quality health care our health
care system is the envy of the world
because we believe in making sure that
the decisions are made by doctors and
patients not by officials in the
nation's capital president just said
that government-run health care results
in poor quality now maybe that explains
why he hasn't fully funded the va and
the va hospital is having trouble and
veterans are complaining maybe that
explains why medicare patients are
complaining about being pushed off of
medicare doesn't adequately fund it but
let me just say to america i am not
proposing a government-run program
that's not what i have i have blue cross
blue shield senators and congressmen
have a wide choice americans ought to
have it too mr president we talked
about the va we've increased va funding
by 22 billion in the four years since
i've been president that's twice the
amount that my predecessor increased va
of course we're meeting our obligation
to our veterans and the veterans know
that we're expanding veteran's health
care throughout the country we're
aligning facilities where the veterans
live now veterans are getting very good
health care under my administration and
they will continue to do so on in during
the next four years mr president the
next question is to you we all know that
social security is running out of money
and it has to be fixed you have proposed
to fix it by letting people put some of
the money collected to pay benefits into
private savings accounts but the critics
are saying that's gonna mean finding a
trillion dollars over the next 10 years
to continue paying benefits as those
accounts are being set up so where do
you get the money are you gonna have to
increase the deficit by that much over
10 years well first let me make sure
that every senior listening today
understands that we talking about
reforming social security that they'll
still get their checks i remember the
2000 campaign people said if george w
gets elected your check will be taken
away what people got their checks and
they'll continue to get their checks
there is a problem for our youngsters a
real problem and if we don't act today
the problem will be valued in the
trillions and so i think we need to
think differently will honor our
commitment to our seniors but for young
for our children or grandchildren we
need to have a different strategy and
recognizing that i called together a
group of our fellow citizens to study
the issue it was a committee chaired by
the late senator daniel patrick moynihan
of new york a democrat and they came up
with a variety of ideas for people to
look at
i believe that younger workers ought to
be allowed to take some of their own
money and put in a personal savings
account because i understand that they
need to get better rates of return than
the rates of return being given in the
current social security trust and the
compounding rate of interest effect will
make it more likely that the social
security system is solvent for our
children and our grandchildren i will
work with republicans and immigrants
will be a vital issue in my second term
it is an issue that i'm willing to take
and so i bring republicans and democrats
together and we're course going to have
to consider the cost but i want to warn
my fellow citizens the cost of doing
nothing the cost of saying the current
system is okay far exceeds the cost of
trying to make sure we save the system
for our children senator kerry you just
heard the president say that young
people ought to be able to take money
out of social security and put it in
their own accounts now my fellow
americans that's an invitation to
disaster the cbo said very clearly that
if you were to adopt the president's
plan there'll be a two trillion dollar
hole in social security because today's
workers pay into the system for today's
retirees and the cbo said that's the
congressional budget office it's
bipartisan they said that there would
have to be a cut in benefits of 25 to 40
percent now the president has never
explained to america ever hasn't done it
tonight where it is the transitional
money that two trillion dollars come
from he's already got three trillion
dollars according to the washington post
of expenses that he's put on the line
from his convention and the promises of
this campaign none of which are paid for
it not one of them are paid for the fact
is that the president is driving the
largest deficits in american history
he's broken the pay-as-you-go rules i
have a record of fighting for fiscal
responsibility in 1985 i was one of the
first democrats broke with my party we
balanced the budget in the 90s we paid
down the debt for two years and that's
what we're gonna do we're gonna pry it
we're gonna protect social security
i will not privatize it i will not cut
the benefits and we're gonna be fiscally
responsible and we will take care of
social security let me just stay on
social security with a new question for
senator kerry because senator kerry you
have just said you will not cut benefits
alan greenspan the chairman of the
federal reserve says there's no way that
social security can pay retirees what we
have promised them unless we recalibrate
what he's suggesting we're going to have
to cut benefits or we're going to have
raise retirement age we may have to take
some other reform but if you've just
said you have promised no changes does
that mean you're just gonna leave this
as a problem another problem for our
children to solve absolutely not bob
this is the same thing we heard i
remember i appeared on meet the press
with tim russert in 1990 something we
heard the same thing we fixed it in fact
we put together a five point six
trillion dollar surplus in the 90s that
was for the purpose of saving social
security if you take the tax cut that
the president united states has given
president bush gave to americans in the
top one percent of america just that tax
cut that went to the top one percent of
america would have saved social security
until the year 2075 the president
decided to give it to the wealthiest
americans in a tax cut now alan
greenspan who i think has done a
terrific job and monetary policy
supports the president's tax cut i don't
i support it for the middle class not
that part of it that goes to people
earning more than $200,000 a year and
when i roll it back and we invest in the
things that i've talked about to move
our economy we're gonna grow
sufficiently that we begin to cut the
deficit in half and we get back to where
we were at the end of the 1990s when we
balance the budget and pay down the debt
of this country now we can do that now
if later on after a period of time we
find that social security is in trouble
we'll pull together the top experts at
the country we'll do exactly what we did
in the 1990s and we'll make whatever
adjustment is necessary but the first
and most important thing is to start
creating jobs in america the jobs the
president creating pay nine thousand
dollars less than the jobs that we're
losing and this is the first president
72 years to preside over an economy in
america that has lost jobs 1.6 million
jobs 11 other presidents 6 democrats and
five republicans had wars had recessions
had great difficulties none of them lost
jobs the way this president has i have a
plan to put america back to work and
we're fiscally responsible and put
america back to work we're gonna fix
social security mr president
he forgot to tell you he voted to tax
social security benefits more than one
time i didn't hear any plan to fix
social security i heard more of the same
he talks about middle-class tax cuts
that's exactly where the tax cuts went
most of the tax cuts went to low and
middle income americans and now the tax
code is more fair 20 of the upper
income people pay about 80 percent of
the taxes in america today because of
that how we structured the tax cuts
people this thing out there know the
benefits of the tax cuts we passed if
you have a child you got tax relief if
you're married you got tax relief if you
pay any tax at all you got tax relief
all of which was opposed by my opponent
and the tax relief was important to spur
consumption and investment to get us out
of this recession people need to
remember six months prior to my arrival
the stock market started to go down and
it was one of the largest declines in
our history and then we had a recession
and we got attacked which cost us 1
million jobs but we acted i led the
congress we passed tax relief and now
this economy is growing we had 1.9
million new jobs over the last 13 months
sure there's more work to do but the way
to make sure our economy grows is not to
raise taxes on small business owners
it's not to increase the scope of the
federal government is to make sure we
have fiscal sanity and keep taxes low
let's go to a new question mr president
i got more email this week on this
question than any other question and it
is about immigration i'm told that at
least 8,000 people across our borders
illegally every day some people believe
this is a security issue as you know
some believe it's an economic issue some
see it as a human rights issue how do
you see it and what do we need to do
about it i see it as a serious problem i
see it as a security issue i see it as
an economic issue and i see it as a
human rights issue we are increasing the
border security of the united states
we've got a thousand more border patrol
agents on the southern border we're
using new equipment
we're using unmanned vehicles to spot
people coming across and will continue
to do so over the next four years it's
the subject i'm very familiar with us
after all i was a boarder governor for a
while many people are coming to this
country for economic reasons they're
coming here to work if you can make 50
cents in a heart of mexico for example
or made five dollars here in america
5:15 you're going to come here if you're
worth your salt if you want to put food
on the table for your families and
that's what's happening
and so we're to take pressure off the
border in order to make the borders more
secure i believe there ought to be a
temporary worker card that allows a
willing worker and a willing employer to
made up so long as there's not a
american willing to do the job to join
up in order to be able to fulfill the
employers needs that has the benefit of
making sure our employers aren't
breaking the laws they try to fill their
workforce needs and makes sure that the
people coming across the border are
humanely treated that they're not kept
in the shadows of our society that
they're able to go back and forth to see
their families see the car it will have
a period of time attached to it it also
means it takes pressure off the border
if somebody is coming here to work with
a car that means they're not gonna have
to sneak across the border it means our
border patrol will be more likely to be
able to to focus on doing their job now
it's very important for our citizens to
also know that i don't believe we ought
to have amnesty i don't think we ought
to reward illegal behavior there are
plenty of people standing in line to
become a citizen and we ought not to
crowd these people ahead of them in line
if they want to become a citizen things
stand in line too and here's where my
opponent i differ in september 2003 he
supported amnesty for illegal aliens
time's up senator let me just answer one
part of the last question quickly and
then i'll come to immigration the
american middle class family isn't
making it right now bob and what the
president said about the tax cuts have
been wiped out by the increase in health
care the increase in gasoline the
increase in tuitions the increase in
prescription drugs the fact is that
take-home pay of a typical american
family as a share of national income
is lower than its been since 1929 and
the take-home pay of the richest 0.1
percent of americans is the highest it's
been since 1928 under president bush the
the the middle class has seen their tax
burden go up and the wealthiest tax
burden has gone down now that's wrong
now with respect to immigration reform
the president broke his promise on
immigration reform he said he would
reform it four years later he's now
promising another plan here's what i'll
number one the borders are more leaking
today than they were before 9/11 the
fact is we haven't done what we need to
do to toughen up our borders and i will
secondly we need a guest worker program
but if it's all we have it's not going
to solve the problem the second thing we
need is to crack down on illegal hiring
it's against the law in the united
states to hire people illegally and we
ought to be enforcing that law properly
and thirdly we need an earned
legalization program for people who've
been here for a long time stayed out of
trouble got a job paid their taxes and
their kids are american we got to start
moving them towards full citizenship out
of the shadows you want to respond mr
president well to say that the borders
are not as protected as they were prior
to september the 11th shows he doesn't
know the borders they're much better
protected today than they were when i
was the governor of texas and we got
much more manpower much more equipment
there it's just he just doesn't
understand how the borders work
evidently to say that that is an
outrageous claim and will continue to
protect our borders will continue
increased manpower and equipment senator
four thousand people a day coming across
the border the fact is that we now have
people from the middle east allegedly
coming across the border and we're not
doing what we ought to do in terms of
the technology we have iris
identification technology we have
thumbprint fingerprint technology today
we can know who the people are that
they're really the people they say they
are when they cross the border we could
speed it up there are huge delays the
fact is our borders are not as secure as
they ought to be and i'll make them
secure next question to you senator
kerry the gap between rich and poor is
growing wider more people are dropping
into poverty yet the minimum wage has
been stuck at what $5.15 an hour now for
about seven years is it time to raise it
well i'm glad you raised that question
it's long overdue time to raise the
minimum wage and america this is one of
those issues that that separates the
president myself we have fought to try
to raise the minimum wage in the last
years but the republican leadership of
the house and senate won't even let us
have a vote on it we're not allowed to
vote on it they don't want to raise the
minimum wage the minimum wage is the
lowest minimum wage value it has been in
our nation in 50 years if we raise the
minimum wage which i will do over
several years to seven dollars an hour
nine point two million women who are
trying to raise their families would
earn another three thousand eight
hundred dollars a year the president has
denied nine point two million women
three thousand eight hundred dollars a
year but he doesn't hesitate to fight
four hundred and thirty six thousand
dollars to a millionaire 1 of america
got eighty nine billion dollars last
year in a tax cut but people working
hard playing by the rules trying to take
care of their kids family values that
we're supposed to fail you so much in
i'm tired of politicians to talk about
family values and don't value families
what we need to do is raise the minimum
wage we also need to hold on to equal
pay women work for 76 cents on the
dollar for the same work that men do
that's not right in america and we had
an initiative that we were working on to
raise women's pay they've cut it off
they've stopped it they don't enforce
these kinds of things i think that it is
a matter of fundamental right that if we
raise the minimum wage fifteen million
americans would be positively affected
we'd put money into the hands of people
who work hard to obey the rules who play
for the american dream and if we did
that we'd have more consumption ability
in america which is what we need right
now in order to quit kick our economy
into gear
i will fight tooth and nail to pass the
minimum wage mr presley
mitch mcconnell had a minimum-wage plan
that i supported that it would have
increased the minimum wage but let me
talk about what's really important for
the worker you're referring to and
that's to make sure the education system
works is to make sure we raise standards
listen the no child left behind act is
really a jobs act when you think about
it the no child left behind act says
we'll raise standards will increase a
federal spending but in return for extra
spending we now want people to measure
states and local jurisdictions to
measure to show us whether or not a
child can read or write or add and
subtract you cannot solve a problem
unless you diagnose the problem and we
weren't diagnosing problems and
therefore just kids were being shuffled
through the school and guess who had
gets shuffled through children whose
parents wouldn't speak english is the
first language just move through many
inner-city kids just move through we've
stopped that practice now by measuring
early and when we find a problem we
spend extra money to correct it i
remember a lady in houston texas i mean
reading is the new civil right and she's
right in order to make sure people have
jobs for the 21st century you've got to
get it right in the education system and
we're beginning to close them a minority
achievement gap now you see we'll never
be able to compete in the 21st century
unless we have an education system that
doesn't quit on children an education
system that raises standards and
education that makes sure there's
excellence in every classroom mr
president i want to go back to something
senator kerry said earlier tonight and
ask a follow-up of my own he said and
this will be a new question to you he
said that you had never said whether you
would like to overturn roe v wade so i'd
ask you directly what he's asking me is
well i have a litmus test for my judges
and the answer is no i will not have a
litmus test
i will pick judges who will interpret
the constitution but i'll have no litmus
test to carry out a new question that's
the question or center for president
which time linda do you have 90 seconds
very much well again the president
didn't answer the question i'll answer
it straight to america i'm not going to
appoint a judge to the court
who's going to undo a constitutional
right whether it's the first amendment
or the fifth amendment or some other
right that's given under our courts
today or under the constitution and i
believe that the right of choice is a
constitutional right so i don't intend
to see it undone clearly the president
wants to leave an ambivalence or intends
to undo it
let me go a step further we have a long
distance yet to travel in terms of
fairness in america i don't know how you
can govern in this country when you look
at new york city and you see that 50 of
the black males there are unemployed
when you see 40 of hispanic children or
black children in some cities dropping
out of high school and yet the president
who talks about no child left behind
refused to fully fund the tort by 28
billion dollars that particular program
so you can make a difference in the
lives of those young people now right
here in arizona that difference would
have been a hundred and thirty 1 million
dollars to the state of arizona to help
its kids be able to have better
education and to lift the property tax
burden from its citizens the president
reneged on his promise to fund no child
left fine he'll tell you he's raised the
money and he has but he didn't put in
what he promised and that makes a
difference in the lives of our children
yes sir two things one he clearly has a
litmus test first judges which i
disagree with and secondly only a
liberal senator from massachusetts would
say that a 49 increase in funding for
education was not enough we've increased
funds but more importantly we reform the
system to make sure that we solve
problems early before the too late he
talked about the unemployed absolutely
we've got to make sure they get educated
he talked about children whose parents
don't speak english as a first language
absolutely we got to make sure they get
educated and that's what the no child
left behind act does senator you don't
measure it by a percentage increase mr
whether you're getting the job done
500,000 kids lost after-school programs
because of your budget now that's not in
my gut
that's not my value system and certainly
not so that the wealthiest people in
america can walk away with another tax
cut 89 billion dollars last year to the
top 1 of americans but kids lost their
after-school programs you be the judge
all right let's go up to another
question and it is to senator kerry you
have two minutes sir
senator the last debate president bush
said he did not favor a draft you agreed
with him but our national guard and
reserve forces are being severely
strained because many of them are being
held beyond their enlistments some of
them say that it's a backdoor draft is
there any relief that could be offered
to these brave americans and their
families if you became president and
senator kerry what would you do about
this situation of holding national guard
and reservists for these extended
periods of time and these repeated call
ups that they're now facing well i think
the fact that they're facing these
repeated calls up some of them two and
three deployments and there's a stoploss
policy that prevents people from being
able to get out when their time was up
is a reflection of the bad judgment this
president exercised in how he has
engaged in the world and deployed our
forces our military's overextended nine
out of ten active duty army divisions
are either in iraq going to iraq or have
come back from iraq one way or the other
they're wrapped up in it now i've
proposed adding two active-duty
divisions to the armed forces the united
states one combat one support in
addition i'm going to double the number
of special forces so that we can fight a
more effective war on terror with less
pressure on the national guard and
reserve and what i would like to do is
see the national guard and reserve be
deployed differently here in our own
country there's much we can do with them
with respect to homeland security we
ought to be doing that and and that
would relieve an enormous amount of
pressure but the most important thing to
relieve the pressure on all
our armed forces is frankly to run a
foreign policy that recognizes that
america is strongest when we are working
with real alliances when we are sharing
the burdens of the world by working
through our statesmanship at the highest
levels and our diplomacy to bring other
nations to our side i've said it before
where i say it again i believe the
president broke faith with the american
people in the way that he took this
nation to war he said he would work
through the a real alliance he said in
cincinnati we would plan carefully we
would take every precaution
well we didn't and the result is our
forces today are overextended the fact
is that he did not choose to go to war
as a last resort and america now is
paying already 120 billion up to 200
billion before we're finished and much
more probably and that is the result of
this president taking his eye off of
osama bin laden mr president
the best way to take the pressure off
our troops is to succeed in iraq is to
train iraqis so they can do the hard
work of democracy is to give them a
chance to defend their country but
cisely what we're doing will have
125,000 troops trained by the end of
this year
i'm never going on an airplane in bangor
maine to say thanks to the reservists in
guard that were headed overseas from
tennessee and north carolina and georgia
some of them in there before people i've
talked to the spirits were high they
didn't view this their service as a
backdoor draft they viewed their service
as an opportunity to serve their country
my opponent senator talks about foreign
policy in our first debate he proposed
america pass a global test in order
defend ourselves we have to get
international approval that's one of the
major differences we have about
defending our country i work with allies
i work with friends we'll continue to
build strong coalition's but i will
never turn over our national security
system to leaders of other countries
we'll be resolute will be strong and
will wage a comprehensive war against
the terrorists senator i have never
suggested a test where we turn over our
security to any nation in fact i've said
the opposite i will never turn the
security of the united states over to
any nation no nation will ever have a
veto over us but i think it makes sense
i think most americans in their guts
know that we ought to pass a sort of
truth standard that's how you gain
legitimacy with your own country people
and that's how you gain legitimacy in
the world but i'll never fail to protect
the united states of america in 1990
there was a vast coalition put together
to run saddam hussein out of kuwait the
international community the
international world said this is the
right thing to do but when it came time
to authorize the use of force on the
senate floor my opponent voted against
the use of force apparently can't pass
any test under his vision of the world
mr president new question two minutes
you said that if congress would vote to
extend the ban on assault weapons that
you'd sign the legislation but you did
nothing to encourage the congress to
extend it why not actually i made my
intentions my views clear i did think we
ought to extend the salt weapons ban and
was told the fact that the bill would
never going to move because the
republicans and democrats were against
the salt weapon ban people of both
i believe law-abiding citizens ought to
be able to own a gun i believe in
background checks at gun shows or
anywhere to make sure that guns don't
get in the hands of people that
shouldn't have them but the best way to
protect our citizens from guns is to
prosecute those who commit crimes with
guns and that's why early in my
administration i called the attorney
general and the us attorney's and said
put together taskforce all around the
country to prosecute those who commit
crimes with guns and the prosecution's
are up by about 68 i believe is the
number neighborhoods are safer when we
crack down on people who commit crimes
with guns to me that's the best way
secure america senator i believe it was
a failure of presidential leadership not
to reauthorize the assault weapons ban i
am a hunter i'm a gun owner i've been a
hunter since i was a kid 12 13 years old
and i respect the second amendment and i
will not tamper with the second
amendment but i'll tell you this i'm
also a former law enforcement officer i
ran one of the largest district
attorney's offices in america when the
ten largest i put people behind bars for
the rest of their life i've broken up
organized crime i know something about
prosecuting and most of the law
enforcement agencies in america wanted
that assault weapons ban they don't want
to go into a drug bust and be facing an
ak-47 i was hunting in iowa last year
with the sheriff from one of the
counties there and he pointed to a house
in back of us and said see that house
over there we just did a drug bust a
week earlier and the guy we arrested at
an ak-47 lying on the bed right beside
him because of the president's decision
today law enforcement officers will walk
into a place that'll be more dangerous
terrorists can now come into america and
go to a gun show and without even a
background check buy an assault weapon
today and that's what osama bin laden's
handbook said because we captured it in
afghanistan it encouraged them to do it
so i believe america is less safe if if
tom delay or someone in the house said
to me sorry we don't have the votes i'd
have said then we're gonna have a fight
and i'd have taken it out to the country
and i'd about every law enforcement
officer in the country visit those
congressmen we'd have won what bill
clinton won let's go to a new question
for you son to carry two minutes
affirmative action do you see a need for
affirmative action programs or have we
moved far enough along that we no longer
need to use race and gender as the
factor in school admissions in federal
and state contracts and so on no bob
regrettably we have not moved far enough
along and and i regret to say that this
administration has even blocked steps
that could help us move further along
give you an example
i'm the i've served on the small
business committee for a long time as
chairman of it once now i'm the senior
democrat on it we used to you know we
have a goal
for minority set-aside programs to try
to encourage ownership in the country
they don't reach those goals they don't
even fight to reach those goals they've
tried to undo them the fact is that in
too many parts of our country we still
have discrimination and and affirmative
action is not just something that
applies to people of color some people
have a mistaken view of it in america it
also is with respect to women it's with
respect to other efforts to try to reach
out and be inclusive in our country i
think that we have a long way to go
regrettably if you look at what's
happened we've made progress i want to
say that at the same time during the
clinton years as you may recall there
was a fight over affirmative action and
there were many people like myself who
opposed quotas who felt there were
places where it was overreaching so we
had a policy called mendon don't end it
we fixed it and we fixed it for a reason
because there are too many people still
in this country who feel the the stark
resistance of racism and so we have a
distance to travel as president i will
make certain we travel it now let me let
me just share something this president
is the first president ever i think not
to not to meet with n-double-a-cp this
is a president who hasn't met with the
black congressional caucus this is a
president who has not met with the civil
rights leadership of our country if a
president doesn't reach out and bring
people in and be inclusive
then how are we gonna get over those
barriers i see that as part of my job as
president and i'll make my best effort
to do it mr president well first of all
it's it is just not true that i haven't
met with the black congressional caucus
i met with the black congressional
caucus at the white house and secondly
like my opponent i don't agree well i
have quotas i agree
you shouldn't have closed but we ought
to have an aggressive effort to make
sure people are educated to make sure
when they get out of high school there's
pell grants available form which is what
we've done we've expanded pell grants by
a million students do you realize today
in america we spend 73
a billion dollars to help 10 million low
and middle income families better afford
that's the access i believe is necessary
to make sure every child learns to read
right add and subtract early to be able
to build on that education by going to
college so they can start their careers
with a college diploma i believe the
best best way to help our small
businesses is not only through small
business loans which we have increased
since i've been the president united
states but to unbundle government
contracts so people have a chance to be
able to bid and receive a contract to
help get their business going minority
ownership of businesses are up because
we create an environment for the
entrepreneurial spirit to be strong i
think i believe part of a of a hopeful
society is one in which somebody owns
something today in america more
minorities owned a home than ever before
and that's hopeful and that's positive
mr president let's go to a new question
you were asked before the invasion or
after the invasion of iraq if you
checked with your dad and i believe i
don't remember the quote exactly but i
believe you said you had checked with a
higher authority i would like to ask you
what part does your faith play on your
policy decisions first my faith plays a
lot a big part in my life and that's
when i was answering that question what
i was really saying to the person was
that i pray a lot and i did and my faith
is a very it's very personal i pray for
strength i pray for wisdom i pray for
our troops in harm's way i pray for my
family i pray for my little girls but
i'm mindful in a free society that
people can worship if they want to or
not you're equally an american if you
choose the worship an almighty and you
choose not to if you're christians
you're muslim you're equally an american
that's the great thing about america is
the right to worship the way you see fit
prayer in religion sustained me
i received calmness in the storms of the
presidency i loved the fact that people
pray for me and my family all around the
country somebody asked me one time well
how do you know i said i just feel it
religion is important part i never want
to impose my religion on anybody else
but when i make decisions i stand on
principle and the principles are derived
from who i am i believe we ought to love
our neighbor like we love ourselves it's
manifested in public policy through the
faith-based initiative where we've
unleashed the armies of compassion to
help seal hill people who heard i
believe that god wants everybody to be
free that's what i believe and that's
one part of my foreign policy in
afghanistan i believe that the freedom
there is a gift from the almighty and i
can't tell you how encouraging to see
freedom on the march and so my
principles that i make decisions on are
part of me and religion is a part of me
senator kerry well i respect everything
that the president has said and and
certainly respect his faith i think it's
important that i share it i think that
he just said that freedom is a gift from
the almighty everything is a gift from
the almighty and as i measure the words
of the bible and we all do different
people measure different things the
koran the torah or you know native
americans who gave me a blessing the
other day had their own special sense of
connectedness to a higher being and
people all find their ways to express it
i was taught i went to a church school
and i was taught that the two greatest
commandments or love the lord your god
with all your mind your body and your
soul and love your neighbor as yourself
and frankly i think we have a lot more
loving of our neighbor to do in this
country and on this planet we have a
separate and unequal school system
the united states of america there's one
for the people who have and there's one
for the people who don't have and we're
struggling with that today the president
i have a difference of opinion about how
we live out our sense of our faith i
talked about it earlier when i talked
about the works and faith without works
being dead i think we got a lot more
work to do and as president i will
always respect everybody's right to
practice religion as they choose or not
to practice because that's part of
america senator kerry after 9/11 and
this is a new question for you it seemed
to me that the country came together as
i've never seen it come together since
world war two but some of that seems to
have melted away i think it's fair to
say we've become pretty pretty polarized
perhaps because of the political season
but if you were elected pressed under
whoever is elected president will you
set a priority and trying to bring the
nation back together or what would be
your attitude on that well very much so
let me pay a compliment to the president
if i may i think in those days after
9/11 i thought the president did a
terrific job and i really was moved as
well as impressed by the speech that he
gave to the congress and i think the hug
tom daschle gave him at that moment was
about as genuine a sense of there being
no democrats no republicans we were all
just americans that's where we were
that's not where we are today i regret
to say that the president who called
himself a uniter not a divider is now
presiding over the most divided america
in the recent memory of our country i've
never seen such ideological squabbles at
the congress of the united states i've
never seen members of a party locked out
of meetings the way they're locked out
today we have to change that and as
president i am committed to changing
that you know i i don't care if the idea
comes from the other side or this side i
think we have to come together and work
to change it i've done that over 20
years in the united states senate i've
worked with john mccain who's sitting
i've worked with other colleagues i've
reached across the aisle i've tried to
find the common ground because that's
what makes us strong as americans and if
americans trust me with the presidency i
can pledge to you we will have the most
significant effort openly not secret
meetings in the white house with special
interests not ideologically driven
efforts to push people aside but a
genuine effort to try to restore
america's hope and possibilities by
bringing people together and one of the
ways we're going to do it is i'm going
to work with my friend john mccain to
further campaign finance reform so we
get these incredible amounts of money
out of the system and open it up to
average people so america is really
represented by the people who make up
america mr president my biggest
disappointment in washington is how
partisan the town is i had a record of
working with republicans and democrats
as the governor of texas and i was
hopeful to be able to do the same thing
and we made good progress early on the
no child left behind act incredibly
enough was was good work between me and
my administration and people like
senator ted kennedy and we worked
together with democrats to relieve the
tax burden on the middle class and all
the pay taxes in order to make sure this
economy continues to grow but washington
is a tough town and the way i view it is
there's a lot of entrenched special
interests there people who are you know
on one side of the issue or another and
they spend enormous sums of money and
they convince different senators to tout
their way or different congressmen to
talk about their issue and they dig in
how continued it in the four years to
continue to try to work to do so my
opponent said this is a bitterly divided
time pretty divided in the 2000 election
so in other words it's pretty divided
during the 1990s as well which was just
in a period and we've got to work to
brina my opponent keeps mentioning john
mccain and i'm glad he did john mccain
is for me for president because he
understands i have the right view and
the war on terror and that my plan will
succeed in iraq and my opponent has got
a plan of retreat and defeat in iraq
we've come gentlemen to our last
question and it occurred to me as i came
to this debate tonight that the three of
us share something all three of us are
surrounded by very strong women okay
we're all married to strong women each
of us have two daughters that make us
very proud i'd like to ask each of you
what is the most important thing you've
learned from these strong women to
listen to him
to stand up straight and not scowl
i love them strong women around me
i can't tell you how much i love my wife
and her daughters i am you know it's
really interesting i tell the people in
the campaign trail when i asked laura to
marry me she said fine just so long as i
never have to give a speech i said okay
you got a deal
fortunately she didn't hold me to that
deal and she's out campaigning along
with our girls and she speaks english a
lot better than i do i think people
understand what she's saying but they
see a compassionate strong great first
lady in laura bush i can't tell you how
lucky i am when i met her in the
backyard a joe and jan o'neal in midland
it's the classic backyard barbecue
o'neal said come on over i think you'll
find somebody who might interest you
says that all right bopped over there
there's only four of us there and not
only she interests me i guess you could
say it was love at first sight
senator kerry well i guess the president
and you and i are three examples of
lucky people who married up and some
would say maybe me more so than others
but i can take it
can i say if i could just say a word
about a woman that you didn't ask about
but my mom passed away a couple years
ago just before i was deciding to run
and she was in the hospital and i went
in to talk to her and tell her what i
was thinking of doing and she looked at
me from her hospital bed and she just
looked at me and she said remember
integrity integrity integrity those are
the three words that she left me with
and my daughters and my wife are people
who just are filled with that sense of
what's right what's wrong
they also kicked me around they keep me
honest they don't let me get away with
anything i can sometimes take myself too
seriously they surely don't let me do
that and i'm blessed as i think the
president is blessed as i said last time
i've watched him with the first lady who
i admire a great deal and his daughters
he's a great father and i think we're
both very lucky well gentlemen that
brings us to the closing statements
they're sent to kerry i believe you're
first my fellow americans as you heard
from bob schieffer a moment ago america
is being tested by division more than
ever we need to be united as a country
and like franklin roosevelt i don't care
whether an idea is a republican idea or
a democrat idea i just care whether it
works for america and whether it's gonna
make us stronger these are dangerous
i believe i offer tested strong
leadership that can calm the waters of a
troubled world and i believe that we can
together do things that are within the
grasp of americans we can lift our
schools up we can create jobs that pay
more than the jobs we're losing overseas
we can have health care for all
americans we can further the cause of
equality in our nation let me just make
it clear i will never
any country to have a veto over our
security just as i fought for our
country as a young man with the same
passion i will fight to defend this
nation that i love and with faith in god
and with conviction in the mission of
america i believe that we can reach
higher i believe we can do better i
think the greatest possibilities of our
country our dreams our hopes are out
there just waiting for us to grab onto
them and i asked you to embark on that
journey with me i ask you for your trust
i ask you for your help i ask you to
allow me the privilege of leading this
great nation of ours of helping us to be
stronger here at home and to be
respected again in the world and most of
all to be safer forever thank you good
night and god bless the united states of
america mr president in the oval office
there's a painting by a friend of lauren
mine named by tom lee it's a west texas
painting painting of a mountain scene
and he said this about sarah and i live
on the east side of the madness the
sunrise side not the sunset side it's
the side to see the day that is coming
not to see the day that is gone
i love the optimism in that painting
because that's how i feel about america
and we've been through a lot together
during the last three and three-quarter
years we've come through a recession a
stock market decline an attack on our
country and yet because of the hard work
of the american people in good policies
this economy is growing over the next
four years we'll make sure the economy
continues to grow we reformed our school
system and now there's an achievement
gap in america that's beginning to close
over the next four years will continue
to insist in excellence in every
classroom in america so that our
children have a chance to realize the
great promise of america
over the next four years we'll continue
to work to make sure health care is
available and affordable over the next
four years will continue to rally the
armies of compassion to help heal the
hurt that exists in some of our
these neighborhoods i'm optimistic that
we'll win the war on terror but i
understand it requires firm resolve and
clear purpose we must never waver in the
face of this enemy that these ideologues
of hate and as we pursue the enemy
wherever it exists will also spread
freedom in liberty
we got great faith in the ability of
liberty to transform societies to
convert hostile with a hostile world to
a peaceful world my hope for america is
a prosperous america a hopeful america
and a safer world i want to thank you
for listening tonight i'm asking for
your vote god bless you thank you mr
thank you senator kerry well that brings
these debates to a close but the
campaign goes on i want to wish both of
you the very best of luck between now
and election day that's it for us from
arizona state university in tempe
arizona i'm bob schieffer cbs news
a spirited and wide-ranging debate on
issues ranging from the economy jobs
taxes gay rights done education
social security immigration the full
spectrum of domestic issues played out
on the stage night at arizona state
university and remarkable personal
statements as well from these men about
who they are about their faith and at
the end about the women that you now see
surrounding him here tonight the
president saying the lesson that he's
learned from these women is to listen to
summarize that the president had in mind
tonight with his characterized ron kerry
as a spend fifty bull who's done nothing
in the united states senate who's so far
out of the mainstream that he for the
left of ted kennedy from a situation for
his parts under kerry was saying nothing
is working especially in the economy
especially for women and for blacks two
groups of voters he's very eager to have
on his side